Common HTTP Methods Used in REST API

In HTTP, there are five methods that are commonly used in a REST-based Architecture, i.e., POST, GET, PUT, PATCH, and DELETE. These correspond to create, read, update, and delete (or CRUD) operations, respectively. There are other methods that are less frequently used, like OPTIONS and HEAD.
1. GET Method

The HTTP GET method is used to read (or retrieve) a representation of a resource. In the safe path, GET returns a representation in XML or JSON and an HTTP response code of 200 (OK). In an error case, it most often returns a 404 (NOT FOUND) or 400 (BAD REQUEST).

GET /users/123

This request fetches data for the user with ID 123.
2. POST Method

The POST method is commonly used to create new resources. It is often used to create subordinate resources related to a parent resource. Upon successful creation, the server returns HTTP status 201 (Created) along with a Location header pointing to the newly created resource.

POST /users
{ 
  "name": "Anjali", 
  "email": "gfg@example.com"
}

This request creates a new user with the given data.

     NOTE:  POST is neither safe nor idempotent. 

3. PUT Method

PUT is an HTTP method used to update or create a resource on the server. When using PUT, the entire resource is sent in the request body, and it replaces the current resource at the specified URL. If the resource doesn’t exist, it can create a new one.

PUT /users/123
{ 
  "name": "Anjali", 
  "email": "gfg@example.com"
}

This request updates the user with ID 123 or creates a new user if one doesn't exist.
4. PATCH Method

PATCH is an HTTP method used to partially update a resource on the server. Unlike PUT, PATCH only requires the fields that need to be updated to be sent in the request body. It modifies specific parts of the resource rather than replacing the entire resource.

PATCH /users/123
{ 
  "email": "new.email@example.com" 
}

This request updates only the email of the user with ID 123, leaving the rest of the user data unchanged.
Differences Between PUT & PATCH

Both PATCH and PUT are used to update resources on the server, but they differ in how they handle the update process:
PUT	PATCH
Replaces the entire resource	Updates only specified fields
Must send full data	Only sends changes
Idempotent	Not always idempotent
Example: Updating a user’s entire profile	Example: Changing just a user’s email
5. DELETE Method

It is used to delete a resource identified by a URI. On successful deletion, return HTTP status 200 (OK) along with a response body.

DELETE /users/123

This request deletes the user with ID 123.
