NodeJS NPM

NPM (Node Package Manager) is a package manager for NodeJS modules. It helps developers manage project dependencies, scripts, and third-party libraries. By installing NodeJS on your system, NPM is automatically installed and ready to use.

It is mainly used to manage packages or modules—these are pre-built pieces of code that extend the functionality of your NodeJS application.
The NPM registry hosts millions of free packages that you can download and use in your project.
NPM is installed automatically when you install NodeJS, so you don’t need to set it up manually.
Package in Node.js
A package in NodeJS is a reusable module of code that adds functionality to your application. It can be anything from a small utility function to a full-featured library.

Packages can be installed from the NPM registry.
They are stored in the node_modules folder in your project.
You can easily install, update, or remove packages with NPM commands.
How to Use NPM with NodeJS?
To start using NPM in your project, follow these simple steps

Step 1: Install NodeJS and NPM
First, you need to install NodeJS. NPM is bundled with the NodeJS installation.

Note: You can follow our article to Install the Node and NPM- How to install Node on your system

Step 2: Verify the Installation
After installation, verify NodeJS and NPM are installed by running the following commands in your terminal:

node -v
npm -v
These commands will show the installed versions of NodeJS and NPM.

show the installed versions of Node.js
NodeJS NPM Version
Step 3: Initialize a New NodeJS Project
In the terminal, navigate to your project directory and run:

npm init -y
This will create a package.json file, which stores metadata about your project, including dependencies and scripts.

Step 4: Install Packages with NPM
To install a package, use the following command

npm install <package-name>
For example, to install the Express.js framework

npm install express
This will add express to the node_modules folder and automatically update the package.json file with the installed package information.

Step 5: Install Packages Globally
To install packages that you want to use across multiple projects, use the -g flag:

npm install -g <package-name>
Step 6: Run Scripts
You can also define custom scripts in the package.json file under the "scripts" section. For example:

{
    "scripts": {
        "start": "node app.js"
    }
}
Then, run the script with

npm start
Using NPM Package in the project
Create a file named app.js in the project directory to use the package


//app.js

const express = require('express');//import the required package
const app = express();

app.get('/', (req, res) => {
    res.send('Hello, World!');
});

app.listen(3000, () => {
    console.log('Server running at http://localhost:3000');
});
express() creates an instance of the Express app.
app.get() defines a route handler for HTTP GET requests to the root (/) URL.
res.send() sends the response “Hello, World!” to the client.
app.listen(3000) starts the server on port 3000, and console.log() outputs the server URL.
Now run the application with

node app.js
Visit http://localhost:3000 in your browser, and you should see the message: Hello, World!