What is JavaScript (.js)?

JavaScript is a programming language.

Example (.js):

function add(a, b) {
  return a + b;
}


✔ Runs directly in the browser
✔ No HTML inside
✔ Used everywhere (logic, API calls, helpers)

🔹 What is JSX (.jsx)?

JSX = JavaScript + HTML-like syntax
Used only in React.

Example (.jsx):

function App() {
  return <h1>Hello World</h1>;
}




React is a powerful JavaScript library for building fast, scalable front-end applications.
Created by Facebook, it's known for its component-based structure, single-page applications (SPAs), and virtual DOM,enabling efficient UI updates and a seamless user experience.


React creates a VIRTUAL DOM in memory.
To use React in production, you need npm which is included with Node.js.

Setting up a React Environment
First, make sure you have Node.js installed. You can check by running this in your terminal:
node -v

Install a Build Tool (Vite)
When you have Node.js installed, you can start creating a React application by choosing a build tool.

We will use the Vite build tool in this tutorial.
Run this command to install Vite:
npm install -g create-vite

If the installation was a success, you will get a result like this:
added 1 package in 649ms


Create Vite app (no global install)
npm create vite@latest my-vite-app
or
npx create-vite my-vite-app

Step 3: Choose options
Framework: React
Variant: JavaScript or JavaScript + SWC

Step 4: Run the app
cd my-vite-app
npm install
npm run dev


👉 Open browser: http://localhost:5173

✅ This is the official Vite way



Why Learn React?
Before React, front-end development struggled with:

Manual DOM Manipulation: Traditional JavaScript directly modified the DOM, slowing down the performance.
Complex State Management: Maintaining UI state became messy and hard to debug.
Tight Coupling in Frameworks: Frameworks like Angular introduced complex two-way data binding that made code harder to manage.
React solved these issues with a modern and modular approach.

Core Features
Virtual DOM: React updates only the changed parts of the DOM, resulting in faster rendering.
One-Way Data Binding: Ensures predictable and easy to debug data flow.
Component-Based Architecture: Breaks UI into reusable pieces, improving the code reusability and scalability.





Why Should I Learn ES6?
React uses ES6, and you should be familiar with some of the new features like:

Classes
Arrow Functions
Variables (let, const, var)
Array Methods like .map()
Destructuring
Modules
Ternary Operator
Spread Operator
